# Stock Market History

- [Stock Market History](#stock-market-history)
  - [Quiz](#quiz)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Periods](#periods)
  - [18th Century](#18th-century)
    - [The War for Independence](#the-war-for-independence)
    - [The Buttonwood Agreement and NYSE](#the-buttonwood-agreement-and-nyse)
  - [19th Century](#19th-century)
    - [NYSE Moves to Wall Street](#nyse-moves-to-wall-street)
    - [The American Civil War](#the-american-civil-war)
      - [Dixieland](#dixieland)
    - [Incorporation of the NYSE](#incorporation-of-the-nyse)
    - [The Panic of 1893](#the-panic-of-1893)
  - [20th Century](#20th-century)
    - [Ticker Tape](#ticker-tape)
    - [The Panic of 1907](#the-panic-of-1907)
    - [The Great Crash of 1929](#the-great-crash-of-1929)
      - [Causes of the Great Crash](#causes-of-the-great-crash)
      - [Relevance to Today](#relevance-to-today)
    - [Creation of the SEC](#creation-of-the-sec)
    - [American Economy "Golden Age"](#american-economy-golden-age)
    - [The "Nifty Fifty" Period](#the-nifty-fifty-period)
    - [The "Go-Go" Years and "Tech Boom"](#the-go-go-years-and-tech-boom)
  - [21th Century](#21th-century)
    - [The New Millenium](#the-new-millenium)
    - [The Great Recession](#the-great-recession)
    - [Recovery](#recovery)
    - [COVID-19](#covid-19)
    - [Present](#present)
  - [Quiz Answers](#quiz-answers)
  - [Key Figures](#key-figures)
  - [Glossary](#glossary)

---

## Quiz

1. When was the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) founded?
1. Where was the NYSE originally located?
1. What was the Buttonwood Agreement, and how did it relate to the NYSE?
1. What event was the NYSE closed for the longest period of time?
1. How did the NYSE move to its current location at 11 Wall Street?
1. What was the impact of the American Civil War on the NYSE?
1. What was the first ticker tape machine, and how did it affect the NYSE?
1. What was the stock market crash of 1929, and what caused it?
1. What was the Great Recession, and how did it affect the stock market?
1. When was the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) created, and what is
   its role?

## Overview

The American stock market has a long and complex history that has been shaped
by a variety of economic, political, and technological factors. Here is a brief
overview of some key events and developments in the history of the American
stock market:

- 1602: The Dutch East India Company, which was one of the first publicly
  traded companies in the world, begins trading shares in Amsterdam.

- 1792: The Buttonwood Agreement is signed, establishing the New York Stock
  Exchange (NYSE) as a formal market for the trading of securities.

- 1817: The NYSE moves to its current location at Wall Street in New York City.

- 1869: The NYSE becomes a corporation, with a board of directors and formal
  rules governing the trading of securities.

- 1901: The NYSE begins using ticker tape to disseminate stock prices, allowing
  for more efficient and transparent trading.

- 1929: The stock market crash of 1929, also known as the Great Crash, leads to
  a significant decline in stock prices and contributes to the onset of the
  Great Depression.

- 1934: The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is created to regulate the
  stock market and protect investors.

- 1950s-1960s: The stock market experiences strong growth as the economy
  expands and corporate profits rise.

- 1970s: The stock market is affected by economic downturns, including a
  recession in the early 1970s and the energy crisis of the late 1970s.

- 1980s-1990s: The stock market experiences a bull market, with strong growth
  and rising stock prices.

- 2000s: The stock market experiences several ups and downs, including the
  dot-com bubble of the late 1990s and the financial crisis of 2008.

- 2010s-2020s: The stock market recovers from the financial crisis and
  experiences continued growth, although there have been periods of volatility.

- 2020: The stock market is affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to
  significant declines in stock prices.

- 2021: The stock market recovers from the pandemic-induced declines and
  experiences strong growth as the economy recovers and corporate profits rise.

Throughout its history, the American stock market has played a central role in
the economy and has been a source of investment for individuals and
institutions. It has also been influenced by a variety of external factors,
including economic conditions, political developments, technological
innovations, and global events.

Today, the American stock market is a complex and dynamic system that includes
a range of exchanges, such as the NYSE and the NASDAQ, and a diverse array of
publicly traded companies. It is also closely monitored and regulated by the
SEC and other government agencies to ensure fairness and transparency in the
trading of securities.

## Periods

Here is a list of some of the major periods in the history of the American
stock market, along with brief descriptions of each:

- The colonial era (17th and 18th centuries): The stock market in the United
  States has a long history dating back to the colonial era. During this
  period, the first publicly traded companies were established in the colonies,
  and stock markets began to emerge in cities such as New York and
  Philadelphia.

- The early republic (19th century): The early republic was a period of rapid
  economic growth and expansion in the United States, and this was reflected in
  the stock market. The first organized stock exchange, the New York Stock
  Exchange (NYSE), was established in 1817, and the stock market played a key
  role in financing the growth and development of the U.S. economy.

- The Gilded Age (late 19th and early 20th centuries): The Gilded Age was a
  period of economic expansion and industrialization in the United States, and
  this was reflected in the stock market. The stock market experienced a number
  of booms and busts during this period, including the Panic of 1893 and the
  Panic of 1907.

- The Great Depression (1929-1939): The Great Depression was a period of
  economic downturn that had a significant impact on the stock market. The
  stock market crash of 1929 marked the beginning of the Great Depression, and
  the market experienced a significant decline in the following years.

- The post-World War II era (mid-20th century): The post-World War II era was a
  period of strong economic growth and expansion in the United States, and this
  was reflected in the stock market. The 1950s and 1960s are often referred to
  as the "Golden Age" of the American economy, and the stock market reached new
  highs during this period.

- The 1970s: A period of economic turmoil and market volatility in the United
  States. The 1970s are often referred to as the "Nifty Fifty" period, due to
  the high valuations of a group of 50 popular blue-chip stocks that were seen
  as the market leaders of the time.

- The 1980s and 1990s: A period of strong economic growth and expansion in the
  United States. The 1980s are often referred to as the "Go-Go" years, due to
  the strong performance of the stock market, and the 1990s are often referred
  to as the "Tech Boom" or "Dot-Com Boom," due to the rapid growth of the
  technology sector and the rise of the internet.

- The 2000s: A period of economic uncertainty and market volatility in the
  United States. The 2000s are often referred to as the "Dot-Com Bust" or the
  "Great Recession," due to the collapse of the technology sector in the early
  2000s and the financial crisis of 2007-2008.

- The 2010s and 2020s: A period of economic expansion and market growth in the
  United States. The 2010s are often referred to as the "recovery" period, due
  to the strong economic recovery following the financial crisis of 2007-2008,
  and the 2020s are often referred to as the "post-COVID" period, due to the
  impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and the stock market. This
  period has been characterized by a number of factors that have supported the
  stock market, including strong economic growth, rising productivity, and low
  interest rates.

## 18th Century

### The War for Independence

The American Stock Market was relatively small and undeveloped during the War
for Independence (1775-1783). The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), which is the
largest stock exchange in the United States today, was not founded until 1792.

During the War for Independence, the U.S. economy was primarily based on
agriculture and trade, and there was limited demand for securities. The
issuance of securities, such as bonds, was primarily used to finance the war
effort, and the sale of these securities was limited to a small group of
investors.

The war also disrupted trade and commerce, leading to economic downturns and
declines in economic activity. As a result, the stock market was relatively
inactive during this period, and there was limited demand for securities.

After the war, the U.S. economy began to expand and the demand for securities
increased, leading to the growth of the stock market. The NYSE was founded in
1792, and the stock market played an increasingly important role in the U.S.
economy as the country industrialized and grew in the 19th and 20th centuries.

### The Buttonwood Agreement and NYSE

The Buttonwood Agreement was a document signed by a group of New York
City-based stockbrokers and merchants in 1792, which established the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) as a formal market for the trading of securities. Prior
to the Buttonwood Agreement, securities trading in the United States was
conducted informally, with brokers and traders meeting under a buttonwood tree
on Wall Street to conduct business.

The Buttonwood Agreement established a set of rules for the trading of
securities, including the use of a central location for trading and a
standardized commission structure. It also established the NYSE as a
self-regulatory organization, with the authority to set rules and standards for
the trading of securities.

## 19th Century

### NYSE Moves to Wall Street

The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) has moved a number of times throughout its
history. Here is a brief overview of some of the key moves:

- 1792-1817: The NYSE was originally located at the Tontine Coffee House at
  Wall Street in Manhattan, New York City. This new location provided the NYSE
  with more space and better facilities to accommodate its growing membership
  and expanding business.

- 1817-1842: In 1817, the NYSE moved to a building at 40 Wall Street in
  Manhattan, where it stayed until 1842.

- 1842-1865: In 1842, the NYSE moved to a new building at 11 Wall Street in
  Manhattan, where it remained until 1865.

- 1865-1903: In 1865, the NYSE moved to a new building at 18 Broad Street in
  Manhattan, where it stayed until 1903.

- 1903-present: In 1903, the NYSE moved to its current location at 11 Wall
  Street in Manhattan, where it has remained to this day.

The Tontine Coffee House was a historic coffee house located at Wall Street in
Manhattan in New York City. The coffee house, which was named after the Tontine
Insurance Company, was a popular gathering place for merchants, traders, and
financiers in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. It was also a key
location for the development of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).

The move to Wall Street helped to solidify the NYSE's position as the center of
the financial world and set the stage for its further growth and expansion in
the coming years. Today, the NYSE is located at 11 Wall Street and is the
largest stock exchange in the United States and one of the largest in the
world.

### The American Civil War

The American Civil War (1861-1865) had a significant impact on the New York
Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the broader U.S. economy. The war disrupted trade and
commerce, leading to significant declines in economic activity and stock
prices.

During the war, the NYSE was closed several times due to the disruption of
transportation and communication systems, and trading activity was limited.
Many companies also went bankrupt or faced financial difficulties due to the
war, leading to declines in stock prices.

However, the NYSE also played a role in financing the war effort, as the Union
government sold bonds to raise money for the war. The sale of these bonds
helped to support the stock market and maintain investor confidence, even as
the war disrupted other aspects of the economy.

After the war, the NYSE and the U.S. economy experienced a period of recovery
and growth as trade and commerce resumed and the country began to rebuild. The
war had a lasting impact on the U.S. economy and the stock market, and it
shaped the direction of the country's development in the years that followed.

#### Dixieland

During the American Civil War (1861-1865), the Confederate States of America,
also known as the Confederacy, did not have a centralized stock exchange like
the Union. The Confederacy was made up of 11 states that seceded from the
United States and formed their own government. The Confederacy was a largely
agricultural economy, and there was not a significant stock market or financial
sector in the region.

However, some Confederate states did have local stock exchanges or markets. For
example, the city of New Orleans, which was located in the Confederate state of
Louisiana, had a thriving financial sector and a stock exchange. The New
Orleans Stock Exchange, which was founded in 1831, was one of the oldest stock
exchanges in the United States. However, the exchange was disrupted by the
Civil War, and it struggled to recover after the war ended.

Overall, the Confederacy did not have a centralized stock exchange like the
Union, but some Confederate states did have local exchanges or markets. The
Civil War had a significant impact on the financial sector in the Confederacy,
and it took many years for the region to recover after the war ended.

### Incorporation of the NYSE

In 1869, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) became a corporation, with a board
of directors and formal rules governing the trading of securities. This marked
a significant milestone in the history of the NYSE and helped to establish it
as a more formal and organized institution.

Prior to 1869, the NYSE was a self-regulatory organization, with the authority
to set rules and standards for the trading of securities. However, as the U.S.
economy expanded and the demand for securities increased in the 19th century,
the NYSE grew rapidly and became more complex. The incorporation of the NYSE in
1869 helped to provide the exchange with a more formal and structured
governance structure and better equipped it to handle the increasing volume and
complexity of its business.

### The Panic of 1893

The Panic of 1893 was a financial crisis that had a significant impact on the
United States economy and the stock market.

Some of the key causes of the crisis included:

- A financial panic in Europe: In the early 1890s, there was a financial panic
  in Europe that had a negative impact on the global economy. This panic was
  triggered by a number of factors, including a recession in Germany, the
  collapse of the Barings Bank in London, and concerns about the stability of
  the British pound.

- A collapse in the price of silver: In the late 1880s, the United States
  adopted the gold standard, which meant that the U.S. dollar was pegged to the
  price of gold. This change led to a decline in the price of silver, which had
  a negative impact on silver miners and producers in the United States.

- Economic and political issues in the United States: The Panic of 1893 was
  also fueled by a number of economic and political issues in the United
  States. The U.S. economy was experiencing a slowdown, and there was a high
  level of debt and overcapacity in the economy. Additionally, there were
  political issues, such as the Populist movement and the struggle between
  labor and capital, that contributed to the crisis.

During the Panic of 1893, the stock market experienced a significant decline,
with prices falling by more than 50%. The crisis also led to a series of bank
failures and a credit crunch, which made it difficult for businesses to access
the capital they needed to operate and expand. The Panic of 1893 was followed
by a deep recession, which lasted for several years.

The recession that followed the Panic of 1893 had a number of negative effects
on the U.S. economy, including:

- Unemployment: The recession led to a significant increase in unemployment, as
  businesses struggled to survive and were forced to lay off workers.

- Deflation: The recession was accompanied by a period of deflation, which
  meant that prices for goods and services fell. This had a negative impact on
  businesses, as it made it difficult for them to raise prices and generate
  profits.

- Agricultural distress: The recession had a particularly negative impact on
  the agricultural sector, as farmers struggled with low prices for their crops
  and rising debts. This led to a wave of foreclosures and a crisis in the
  agricultural sector.

- Political unrest: The economic downturn and the suffering of many Americans
  led to political unrest, as people demanded government intervention and
  reform. This led to the rise of the Populist movement, which called for
  greater government regulation and protections for workers and farmers.

## 20th Century

### Ticker Tape

The use of ticker tape to disseminate stock prices was a significant
development in the history of the American stock market. Ticker tape, which was
a strip of paper with stock prices printed on it, was first used by the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in 1901.

Before the use of ticker tape, stock prices were disseminated manually, through
the use of runners or telegraph operators. This process was slow and
inefficient, and it made it difficult for investors to get timely and accurate
information about stock prices.

The use of ticker tape revolutionized the way stock prices were disseminated
and made it possible for investors to get real-time information about stock
prices. This increased transparency and efficiency in the stock market, making
it easier for investors to buy and sell securities and helping to support the
growth of the market.

Ticker tape was widely used in the American stock market until the 1970s, when
it was replaced by electronic systems for disseminating stock prices. Today,
stock prices are disseminated electronically through a variety of channels,
including online platforms, mobile apps, and financial news networks.

### The Panic of 1907

The Panic of 1907 began in October 1907, when a number of banks in New York
City faced financial difficulties. This led to a run on the banks, as
depositors rushed to withdraw their money. The crisis was exacerbated by a
recession that was already underway, and by a series of corporate failures,
including the failure of the Knickerbocker Trust Company.

The Panic of 1907 had a number of negative effects on the U.S. economy and the
stock market. Some of the key effects of the crisis included:

- A decline in the stock market: The Panic of 1907 was marked by a significant
  decline in the stock market, with prices falling by more than 50%. This
  decline had a negative impact on investors and contributed to a loss of
  confidence in the market.

- Bank failures and a credit crunch: The Panic of 1907 was followed by a series
  of bank failures, as banks struggled to meet the demands of panicked
  depositors. This led to a credit crunch, which made it difficult for
  businesses to access the capital they needed to operate and expand.

- A recession: The Panic of 1907 was followed by a recession, which lasted for
  several years. The recession had a negative impact on the economy, as
  businesses struggled to survive and unemployment rose.

- Political unrest: The economic downturn and the suffering of many Americans
  led to political unrest, as people demanded government intervention and
  reform. This led to the rise of the Progressive movement, which called for
  greater government regulation and protections for workers and consumers.

### The Great Crash of 1929

The stock market crash of 1929, also known as the Great Crash, was a
significant event in the history of the American stock market. It occurred on
October 24, 1929, when the stock market experienced a sudden and dramatic
decline, leading to significant losses for investors and a sharp contraction in
the economy.

The stock market crash of 1929 was the result of a combination of factors,
including overvaluation of stocks, speculation, and economic instability. The
stock market had been experiencing strong growth in the 1920s, and many
investors were heavily invested in stocks. However, as the market began to
decline, panic selling set in, and stock prices plummeted.

The stock market crash of 1929 was followed by a period of economic downturn
known as the Great Depression, which lasted until the late 1930s. The crash and
the ensuing depression had a lasting impact on the U.S. economy and the stock
market, and they shaped the direction of the country's development in the years
that followed. The crash also led to reforms in the financial system and the
creation of new regulatory agencies, such as the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), to help prevent similar events from occurring in the future.

#### Causes of the Great Crash

- Overvaluation of stocks: Many stocks were overvalued at the time of the
  crash, with prices that were not supported by the underlying value of the
  companies. This was due in part to the strong economic growth of the 1920s,
  which fueled a bull market and led to increased demand for stocks.

- Speculation: The bull market of the 1920s was also fueled by speculation,
  with many investors buying stocks on margin, or borrowing money to buy
  stocks. This made the market more vulnerable to rapid price movements, as
  investors were more willing to sell stocks quickly in order to cut their
  losses.

- Economic instability: The stock market crash of 1929 occurred in the context
  of broader economic instability, including declining agricultural prices,
  high levels of consumer debt, and weakness in the banking sector. These
  factors contributed to a general sense of uncertainty and contributed to the
  overall decline in stock prices.

#### Relevance to Today

- Market corrections: The Great Crash was a significant market correction, with
  stock prices plummeting after a period of strong growth. Market corrections,
  which are defined as declines of 10% or more in the stock market, are a
  normal part of the stock market cycle and can be triggered by a variety of
  factors, including economic downturns, corporate earnings disappointments,
  and geopolitical events.

- Investor behavior: The Great Crash was also characterized by investor panic
  and a rush to sell stocks, which exacerbated the decline in stock prices.
  Investor behavior, including emotions such as fear and greed, can have a
  significant impact on the stock market and can contribute to market
  volatility.

- Regulation: The Great Crash led to a number of regulatory reforms, including
  the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which was
  established to regulate the stock market and protect investors. These
  regulatory reforms have helped to ensure a more stable and transparent stock
  market, and they continue to shape the way the market operates today.

- Long-term impact: The Great Crash had a lasting impact on the U.S. economy
  and the stock market, and it shaped the direction of the country's
  development in the years that followed. Similarly, recent events, such as the
  COVID-19 pandemic, may have long-term impacts on the stock market and the
  economy.

- Market crashes vs. recessions: While the stock market crash of 1929 was
  followed by the Great Depression, a market crash does not necessarily lead to
  a recession. A recession is defined as a period of negative economic growth,
  typically characterized by high unemployment, declining business activity,
  and falling prices. While a market crash can be a sign of economic weakness
  and may contribute to a recession, it is not the same thing as a recession.

- Market cycles: The stock market operates in cycles, with periods of growth
  followed by corrections or declines. Understanding these cycles can help
  investors to better navigate the market and make informed investment
  decisions.

- Diversification: The Great Crash highlighted the importance of
  diversification in investing, as investors who were heavily invested in
  stocks were hit hardest by the crash. Diversification, which is the practice
  of spreading investments across different asset classes and sectors, can help
  to reduce risk and protect against market volatility.

- Risk management: The Great Crash also demonstrated the importance of risk
  management in investing, as investors who took on too much risk were more
  vulnerable to losses. Risk management involves understanding and managing the
  risks associated with investments, including the use of tools such as
  stop-loss orders to protect against losses.

Overall, the Great Crash of 1929 remains a significant event in the history of
the stock market and is still relevant today as a cautionary tale about the
importance of risk management and the potential consequences of market
speculation.

### Creation of the SEC

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is a U.S. government agency that
was created in 1934 to regulate the stock market and protect investors. The SEC
was established in response to the stock market crash of 1929, also known as
the Great Crash, which had a significant impact on the U.S. economy and led to
a period of economic downturn known as the Great Depression.

The SEC was created by the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which was passed by
the U.S. Congress in the aftermath of the Great Crash. The act established the
SEC as an independent agency with the authority to regulate the stock market
and enforce federal securities laws.

The SEC is responsible for overseeing the stock market and regulating the
activities of publicly traded companies, brokers, and investment advisers. It
has a number of powers, including the authority to investigate potential
violations of securities laws, bring enforcement actions against individuals or
firms that violate those laws, and impose fines or sanctions.

The creation of the SEC was a significant development in the history of the
stock market and has helped to ensure a more stable and transparent market. The
SEC continues to play a key role in the regulation of the stock market today
and is an important part of the U.S. financial system.

### American Economy "Golden Age"

The 1950s and 1960s were a period of strong economic growth and expansion in
the United States. The 1950s are often referred to as the "Golden Age" of the
American economy, with low unemployment, strong corporate profits, and rising
stock prices. The 1960s saw a continuation of this trend, with the stock market
reaching new highs and continuing to grow.

This period was characterized by a number of factors that supported the stock
market, including:

- Economic growth: The 1950s and 1960s were a period of strong economic growth,
  with the U.S. economy expanding at an annual rate of around 3%. This growth
  was driven by a number of factors, including rising productivity, increased
  consumer spending, and growth in the service sector.

- Corporate profits: The strong economic growth of the 1950s and 1960s helped
  to drive corporate profits, which supported stock prices. Many companies were
  able to generate strong returns on their investments, which attracted
  investors and contributed to the overall growth of the stock market.

- Low interest rates: Interest rates, which are the cost of borrowing money,
  were relatively low during this period, which made it easier for companies to
  finance new projects and investments. Low interest rates also made stocks
  more attractive to investors, as they offered higher potential returns than
  other investments such as bonds.

Overall, the 1950s and 1960s were a period of strong growth and expansion for
the American stock market and the broader economy. This period is often seen as
a time of prosperity and optimism, and it laid the foundations for further
growth and development in the coming decades.

### The "Nifty Fifty" Period

he 1970s were a period of economic turmoil and volatility in the United States,
and this was reflected in the stock market. The 1970s are often referred to as
the "Nifty Fifty" period, due to the high valuations of a group of 50 popular
blue-chip stocks that were seen as the market leaders of the time.

This period was characterized by a number of factors that impacted the stock
market, including:

- Economic slowdown: The 1970s were marked by a period of economic slowdown,
  with the U.S. economy experiencing sluggish growth and high inflation. The
  economic slowdown was driven by a number of factors, including rising energy
  prices, declining productivity, and a sluggish global economy.

- Market corrections: The stock market experienced a number of corrections
  during the 1970s, with prices declining by 10% or more at various points in
  the decade. These corrections were driven by a variety of factors, including
  economic weakness, corporate earnings disappointments, and geopolitical
  events.

- Market crashes: The 1970s were also marked by two significant market crashes,
  the first in 1973-1974 and the second in 1978. These crashes were driven by
  economic uncertainty, rising interest rates, and investor panic, and they had
  a significant impact on the stock market and the broader economy.

Overall, the 1970s were a period of economic uncertainty and market volatility,
and they marked a significant shift in the direction of the U.S. economy and
the stock market.

### The "Go-Go" Years and "Tech Boom"

The 1980s and 1990s were a period of strong economic growth and expansion in
the United States. The 1980s are often referred to as the "Go-Go" years, due to
the strong performance of the stock market, and the 1990s are often referred to
as the "Tech Boom" or "Dot-Com Boom," due to the rapid growth of the technology
sector and the rise of the internet.

This period was characterized by a number of factors that supported the stock
market, including:

- Economic growth: The 1980s and 1990s were a period of strong economic growth,
  with the U.S. economy expanding at an annual rate of around 3%. This growth
  was driven by a number of factors, including rising productivity, low
  interest rates, and strong consumer spending.

- Corporate profits: The strong economic growth of the 1980s and 1990s helped
  to drive corporate profits, which supported stock prices. Many companies were
  able to generate strong returns on their investments, which attracted
  investors and contributed to the overall growth of the stock market.

- The technology sector: The technology sector was a major driver of the stock
  market in the 1990s, with the rise of the internet and the proliferation of
  personal computers and other devices leading to rapid growth in the sector.
  The strong performance of technology stocks helped to drive the overall
  growth of the stock market in the 1990s.

Overall, the 1980s and 1990s were a period of strong growth and expansion for
the American stock market and the broader economy. This period is often seen as
a time of prosperity and optimism.

## 21th Century

### The New Millenium

The 2000s were a period of economic uncertainty and market volatility in the
United States. The 2000s are often referred to as the "Dot-Com Bust" or the
"Great Recession," due to the collapse of the technology sector in the early
2000s and the financial crisis of 2007-2008.

This period was characterized by a number of factors that impacted the stock
market, including:

- The tech bubble: The stock market experienced a bubble in the technology
  sector in the late 1990s and early 2000s, with prices of tech stocks reaching
  unsustainable levels. This bubble burst in 2000, leading to a significant
  decline in tech stock prices and a correction in the overall stock market.

- The housing market bubble: The stock market was also impacted by a bubble in
  the housing market in the mid-2000s, with prices of housing reaching
  unsustainable levels. This bubble burst in 2007, leading to a decline in
  housing prices and a financial crisis that spread throughout the economy.

- Market corrections: The stock market experienced a number of corrections
  during the 2000s, with prices declining by 10% or more at various points in
  the decade. These corrections were driven by a variety of factors, including
  economic weakness, corporate earnings disappointments, and geopolitical
  events.

Overall, the 2000s were a period of economic uncertainty and market volatility,
and they marked a significant shift in the direction of the U.S. economy and
the stock market.

### The Great Recession

The Great Recession was a severe financial crisis that had a significant impact
on the global economy, including the United States. The crisis, which lasted
from 2007 to 2009, was triggered by a number of factors, including the collapse
of the housing market, the failure of financial institutions, and a credit
crunch.

The Great Recession began in 2007, when the U.S. housing market began to
collapse. This was fueled by a housing bubble that had been fueled by lax
lending standards and the proliferation of subprime mortgages. As housing
prices began to fall, many homeowners found themselves underwater on their
mortgages, and many defaulted on their loans.

The crisis was exacerbated by the failure of a number of financial
institutions, including Lehman Brothers, which filed for bankruptcy in
September 2008. This led to a credit crunch, as banks and other financial
institutions became reluctant to lend money, and a liquidity crisis, as
investors pulled back from the financial markets.

The Great Recession had a number of negative effects on the U.S. economy and
the stock market. Some of the key effects of the crisis included:

- A decline in the stock market: The Great Recession was marked by a
  significant decline in the stock market, with the S&P 500 index falling by
  more than 50% from its peak in 2007 to its trough in 2009. This decline had a
  negative impact on investors and contributed to a loss of confidence in the
  market.

- Unemployment: The Great Recession led to a significant increase in
  unemployment, as businesses struggled to survive and were forced to lay off
  workers. Unemployment reached a peak of 10% in October 2009, and many
  Americans struggled to find work in the years that followed.

- Deflation: The Great Recession was accompanied by a period of deflation,
  which meant that prices for goods and services fell. This had a negative
  impact on businesses, as it made it difficult for them to raise prices and
  generate profits.

- Political and social unrest: The economic downturn and the suffering of many
  Americans led to political and social unrest, as people demanded government
  intervention and reform. This led to the rise of the Occupy movement, which
  protested against economic inequality and corporate greed.

### Recovery

The 2010s and 2020s have been a period of economic expansion and market growth
in the United States. The 2010s are often referred to as the "recovery" period,
due to the strong economic recovery following the financial crisis of
2007-2008, and the 2020s are often referred to as the "post-COVID" period, due
to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and the stock market.

This period has been characterized by a number of factors that have supported
the stock market, including:

- Economic growth: The 2010s and 2020s have been a period of strong economic
  growth, with the U.S. economy expanding at an annual rate of around 2%. This
  growth has been driven by a number of factors, including rising productivity,
  low interest rates, and strong consumer spending.

- Corporate profits: The strong economic growth of the 2010s and 2020s has
  helped to drive corporate profits, which have supported stock prices. Many
  companies have been able to generate strong returns on their investments,
  which has attracted investors and contributed to the overall growth of the
  stock market.

- The technology sector: The technology sector has been a major driver of the
  stock market in the 2010s and 2020s, with the continued growth of the
  internet and the proliferation of new technologies leading to strong
  performance in the sector. The strong performance of technology stocks has
  helped to drive the overall growth of the stock market in the 2010s and
  2020s.

Overall, the 2010s and 2020s have been a period of strong growth and expansion
for the American stock market and the broader economy. This period has been
marked by a number of challenges and setbacks, such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

### COVID-19

The year 2020 was a period of significant market volatility and economic
uncertainty in the United States. The year 2020 was marked by the COVID-19
pandemic, which had a significant impact on the economy and the stock market.

This period was characterized by a number of factors that impacted the stock
market, including:

- Economic slowdown: The COVID-19 pandemic led to a sharp economic slowdown in
  2020, with many businesses shutting down or reducing operations and millions
  of Americans losing their jobs. The economic slowdown had a negative impact
  on corporate profits and contributed to market declines.

- Market correction: The stock market experienced a significant correction in
  2020, with prices declining by more than 10% at various points in the year.
  The market correction was driven by economic uncertainty, corporate earnings
  disappointments, and investor panic.

- Market recovery: Despite the market correction, the stock market experienced
  a strong recovery in the second half of 2020, with prices reaching new highs
  in November. The market recovery was driven by a combination of economic
  optimism, strong corporate earnings, and supportive monetary and fiscal
  policy.

Overall, the year 2020 was a period of significant market volatility and
economic uncertainty. However, the market also experienced a strong recovery in
the second half of the year.

### Present

Up until my training cutoff date in 2021, the stock market had been
experiencing a period of strong growth and expansion. In the years leading up
to 2021, the stock market had reached new highs and continued to grow, driven
by a number of factors including strong economic growth, rising productivity,
and low interest rates.

However, the stock market is also subject to fluctuations and corrections, and
there have been a number of market corrections and declines in the years
leading up to my training cutoff date. These corrections have been driven by a
variety of factors, including economic uncertainty, corporate earnings
disappointments, and geopolitical events.

## Quiz Answers

1. The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) was founded in 1792.
1. The NYSE was originally located at the Tontine Coffee House at Wall Street
   in Manhattan, New York City.
1. The Buttonwood Agreement was an agreement signed by a group of New York City
   stockbrokers in 1792, which established the NYSE as an organized marketplace
   for securities trading. The agreement was named after the Buttonwood tree
   under which the brokers met to sign the agreement.
1. The NYSE was closed for the longest period of time in the aftermath of the
   9/11 attacks in 2001.
1. The NYSE moved to its current location at 11 Wall Street in 1903, after
   several previous moves to different locations in Manhattan.
1. The American Civil War (1861-1865) had a significant impact on the NYSE, as
   the conflict disrupted trade and disrupted the economy. The NYSE struggled
   to recover after the war ended, and it took many years for the market to
   return to its pre-war level.
1. The first ticker tape machine was invented in 1867, and it was used to
   transmit stock price information via telegraph. The ticker tape machine had
   a significant impact on the NYSE, as it allowed for faster and more
   efficient communication of market information.
1. The stock market crash of 1929 was a significant market crash that occurred
   in the United States in late October 1929. The crash was caused by a number
   of factors, including overproduction, overspeculation, and a lack of
   regulation in the stock market. The crash led to a significant decline in
   stock prices, and it was a key event in the Great Depression.
1. The Great Recession was a global financial crisis that began in 2007 and
   lasted until 2009. The crisis was caused by the collapse of the housing
   market and the subprime mortgage industry, and it had a significant impact
   on the stock market, leading to significant declines in stock prices.
1. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was created in 1934 in response
   to the stock market crash of 1929. The SEC is a federal agency that is
   responsible for regulating the securities industry and protecting investors
   from fraud and abuse.

## Key Figures

There have been many influential figures in the history of American investing,
including:

- Charles Dow: Charles Dow was a journalist and founder of Dow Jones & Company,
  which publishes the Wall Street Journal and the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
  Dow is credited with developing the concept of index investing and is
  considered a pioneer in the field of financial journalism.

- Benjamin Graham: Benjamin Graham was an economist and investor who is known
  as the "father of value investing." He developed the concept of "intrinsic
  value" and is credited with popularizing the idea of buying undervalued
  stocks. Graham's book, "The Intelligent Investor" and "Security Analysis,"
  are considered a classic in the field of investing.

- John Maynard Keynes: John Maynard Keynes was a British economist whose ideas
  have had a profound influence on economic theory and policy. Keynes is best
  known for his work on macroeconomics and the theory of effective demand,
  which argued that government intervention is necessary to stabilize economies
  in times of recession. Keynes's ideas were influential in shaping the
  policies of the New Deal in the United States and the Marshall Plan in
  Europe.

- Warren Buffett: Warren Buffett is a legendary investor and the CEO of
  Berkshire Hathaway. He is known for his value investing approach and his
  ability to identify undervalued companies with strong potential for growth.
  Buffet is considered one of the most successful investors of all time, and
  his investment strategies are widely studied and emulated by investors around
  the world.

- Charlie Munger: Charlie Munger is the vice chairman of Berkshire Hathaway and
  a close partner and collaborator of Warren Buffett. Munger is known for his
  investing acumen and his emphasis on finding and investing in companies with
  strong fundamentals and long-term growth prospects.

- Peter Lynch: Peter Lynch is a former portfolio manager at Fidelity
  Investments who is known for his ability to identify and invest in
  undervalued companies with strong growth prospects. He is the author of
  several books on investing, including "One Up on Wall Street" and "Beating
  the Street."

- George Soros: George Soros is a billionaire investor and philanthropist who
  is known for his activism and his ability to make successful investments in
  times of economic uncertainty. He is the founder of Soros Fund Management and
  is considered one of the most successful investors of all time.

- John D. Rockefeller: John D. Rockefeller was an industrialist and
  philanthropist who is considered one of the wealthiest and most influential
  businesspeople in history. He made his fortune in the oil industry, and he is
  known for his astute business acumen and his ability to identify and invest
  in profitable opportunities.

- J.P. Morgan: J.P. Morgan was a financier and banker who played a key role in
  the development of the modern American financial system. He was the founder
  of J.P. Morgan & Co., which became one of the largest and most influential
  financial institutions in the world. Morgan is known for his ability to
  finance and consolidate major industries, and he is considered one of the
  most powerful figures in American finance.

- Andrew Carnegie: Andrew Carnegie was an industrialist and philanthropist who
  made his fortune in the steel industry. He is known for his innovative
  business strategies and his ability to identify and invest in profitable
  opportunities. Carnegie is also known for his philanthropy, and he is
  credited with establishing the modern philanthropic model of giving.

- T. Boone Pickens: T. Boone Pickens is a business magnate and investor who is
  known for his successful investments in the energy sector. He is the founder
  of BP Capital Management, and he is considered one of the most successful and
  influential investors in the energy industry.

- Ray Dalio: Ray Dalio is an investor and founder of Bridgewater Associates,
  one of the largest and most successful hedge funds in the world. He is known
  for his innovative approach to investing, which is based on his principles of
  risk management and alignment of interests. Dalio is also the author of the
  book "Principles," which has become a best-seller and is widely read and
  studied by investors around the world.

- Paul Tudor Jones: Paul Tudor Jones is a hedge fund manager and founder of
  Tudor Investment Corporation. He is known for his successful investments in
  the currency and commodities markets, and he is considered one of the most
  successful and influential investors in the hedge fund industry.

- Sam Zell: Sam Zell is a real estate investor and entrepreneur who is known
  for his successful investments in real estate and other industries. He is the
  founder of Equity Group Investments and is considered one of the most
  successful and influential investors in the real estate industry.

- Bill Ackman: Bill Ackman is a hedge fund manager and founder of Pershing
  Square Capital Management. He is known for his activist investing style and
  his successful investments in a variety of industries, including finance,
  healthcare, and retail.

- Dan Loeb: Dan Loeb is a hedge fund manager and founder of Third Point LLC. He
  is known for his successful investments in the technology, healthcare, and
  retail industries, and he is considered one of the most successful and
  influential investors in the hedge fund industry.

- Howard Marks: Howard Marks is an investor and co-founder of Oaktree Capital
  Management. He is known for his successful investments in distressed assets
  and his expertise in risk management. Marks is also the author of the book
  "The Most Important Thing," which has become a best-seller and is widely read
  and studied by investors around the world.

- Seth Klarman: Seth Klarman is an investor and founder of the Baupost Group,
  one of the largest and most successful hedge funds in the world. He is known
  for his value investing approach and his successful investments in a variety
  of industries.

- David Einhorn: David Einhorn is an investor and founder of Greenlight
  Capital, a hedge fund known for its successful investments in a variety of
  industries. Einhorn is also the author of the book "Fooling Some of the
  People All of the Time," which has become a best-seller and is widely read
  and studied by investors around the world.

- David Tepper: David Tepper is an investor and founder of Appaloosa
  Management, a hedge fund known for its successful investments in the
  financial and technology industries. Tepper is also known for his
  philanthropy, and he is considered one of the most successful and influential
  investors in the hedge fund industry.

- Paul Singer: Paul Singer is an investor and founder of Elliott Management, a
  hedge fund known for its successful investments in a variety of industries.
  Singer is also known for his activism, and he is considered one of the most
  successful and influential investors in the hedge fund industry.

- Jamie Dimon: Jamie Dimon is the CEO of JPMorgan Chase, one of the largest and
  most influential banks in the world. He is known for his leadership and his
  ability to navigate the financial markets during times of economic
  uncertainty. Dimon is also known for his philanthropy and his commitment to
  corporate responsibility.

- Charles Schwab: Charles Schwab is the founder and CEO of Charles Schwab &
  Co., one of the largest and most influential brokerage firms in the world. He
  is known for his leadership and his commitment to making financial services
  more accessible to everyday investors.

- Jack Bogle: Jack Bogle is the founder of Vanguard Group, one of the largest
  and most successful mutual fund and exchange-traded fund (ETF) companies in
  the world. He is known for his advocacy of low-cost investing and his
  contributions to the development of index funds.

- Mary Meeker: Mary Meeker is a venture capitalist and partner at Bond Capital.
  She is known for her expertise in technology and her successful investments
  in a variety of technology companies. Meeker is also known for her annual
  Internet Trends report, which is widely read and studied by investors and
  tech industry professionals.

## Glossary

- Credit crunch: A credit crunch is a tightening of credit conditions, which
  can occur when lenders become more cautious about extending credit or when
  the availability of credit is reduced. A credit crunch can have negative
  impacts on economic activity, as it can make it more difficult for businesses
  and individuals to access credit for investment and consumption.

- Economic depression: An economic depression is a severe and prolonged period
  of economic contraction, characterized by high levels of unemployment,
  stagnant or declining output, and declining prices. Depressions are generally
  more severe than recessions and may require significant government
  intervention to address.

- Economic recession: An economic recession is a period of economic
  contraction, characterized by declining output, employment, and trade.
  Recessions are generally measured by a decline in gross domestic product
  (GDP) for two or more consecutive quarters.

- Liquidity crisis: A liquidity crisis occurs when an entity, such as a bank or
  a company, has difficulty meeting its financial obligations because it lacks
  sufficient cash or other liquid assets to meet its short-term obligations. A
  liquidity crisis can lead to financial instability and may require external
  intervention, such as a bailout, to resolve.

- Market correction: A market correction is a decline of at least 10% in the
  value of a financial market index, such as the stock market, from its most
  recent peak. Market corrections are seen as a normal part of the market cycle
  and are generally considered to be less severe than bear markets, which are
  declines of at least 20%.
